Hello, welcome to the PBC Morning Dawn study group at Padmasamy Ling, the Venerable
Camperimache's retreat center in Monastery in New York. Today we're discussing
Chapter 18 of their book, "The Buddhist Path," and the chapter is called "Guru Padmasambhava."
So we'll begin by doing our usual opening prayers, and then we'll begin the discussion.
Thanks so much for joining us.
[Music]
Vajrasapha, Pramadabhadra, Sri Singham, Tamakara, the 25 king and subjects,
souls who are known, young, and the hundred chardons and others,
the lamas of the Kama and Tramala ninjas to you I pray,
the supreme tradition of the glorious Buddha Padmasambhava,
which is the essential, extraordinary view and doctrine of the early translation school,
you keep alive and spread by the light of wisdom, Lord of Dharma, great kenpo,
I pray at your lotus feet, in the palace of the old man Dharmadhaktu,
the essence of all the Buddhas of the three times,
the one who shows clearly the Dharmakaya of my own mind,
we pray to the honor of old Rudguru, glorious true teacher, precious one,
dwelling on the lotus seed and the crown of my head, hold me with your great kindness,
and bestow the accomplishments of body, speech, and mind.
So chapter 18 in the Buddhist Path begins on page 87,
with this chapter is entitled Guru Padmasambhava.
So I'll quickly summarize the first half of the chapter, then we'll have our discussion.
So the Vembrokemba Ramachas begin by saying it is very important for Vajrayana practitioners
to have a connection to Guru Padmasambhava, the enlightened being who was the
reincarnation of Buddha Shakyamuni, and the person who brought Tantric-Vatrayana teachings to Tibet
.
Guru Vembroke was miraculously emanated as an eight-year-old boy in the middle of a lotus
in the country of Udayana, around 500 BCE, four western calendar years after the Buddhas
parinirvana. He was found by King Indra Butti, who is so happy, and he asked him, Guru Vembroke,
to be his son and live in his royal palace, which Guru Vembroke did for many years.
After leaving the palace, Guru Vembroke traveled to many cemeteries to practice meditation.
Although he was already enlightened, Guru Vembroke did this to demonstrate
that practicing meditation for the benefit of all beings leads to enlightenment.
Although Guru Vembroke took many different forms to help beings everywhere,
he had eight principal manifestations to demonstrate different important aspects of
the path to enlightenment. During his life, some different people were jealous of him and tried to
kill him by drowning or burning him, but no one was successful. Instead, Guru Vembroke used these
opportunities to demonstrate his realization of the infinite flexibility of experience
and would bring many beings to the Dharma with his compassionate, miraculous activities.
The Indian King Ashoka was a brutal ruler who killed thousands of people. He lived about 200
years after the Buddha's parinirvana. But by coming in contact with Guru Ramaj in the form of
Guru Sakya Senge, King Ashoka completely gave up all violence and instead began peacefully
establishing the Buddha Dharma throughout southern Asia, including building a million stupas.
In the middle of the eighth century, Guru Ramaj was invited to Tibet to establish Buddhism there.
At this point in time, Guru Ramaj was about 1,500 years old.
I'll read the first topic point. This comes from page 87, the first paragraph, and then page 89,
the second full paragraph. "It is very important for people who wish to follow the Vajrayana
teachings to have a connection with Guru Padmasabhava, the first main teacher of the tantric
tradition in Tibet. Buddha Shakyamuni promised to be reborn in the form of Guru Padmasambhava
in order to spread the Vajrayana teachings in this world. The Buddha predicted Padmasambhava's
activities 19 times in the sutras and tantras. Just as predicted, Guru Padmasambhava was mirac
ulously
born in the middle of a lotus in northwest India in the country of Orihana, eight years after
Buddha Shakyamuni passed away, about 500 BCE. In the middle of the eighth century, Guru Padmasambh
ava
came to Tibet. At the invitation of King Trissang Detsen, the most powerful leader in Asia at that
time, Trissang Detsen was dedicated to establishing the Dharma in Tibet and called upon Padmasambh
ava
for help. Guru Padmasambhava subdued all the negative forces and blessed the entire land
of Tibet. He consecrated the land and supervised the building of Samya monastery, the first Tibetan
monastery. By giving the Vajrayana teachings in accordance with the individual needs and abilities
of his students, many Tibetans obtained enlightenment through his teachings and transmissions.
Among his
most famous students were the 25 close disciples, nine of whom were called his heart students and
the 80 great Siddhas. Well, I was just thinking maybe wanting to ask a little bit about Guru
Padmasambhava as being the reincarnation of Guru Shakyamuni and kind of, you know, as the same
being in a way, I mean the same mind stream, but they taught different things. It seems like, I
mean, you know, Guru Padmasambhava maybe emphasizing the Vajrayana teachings.
And then how was that different than what Guru Shakyamuni was teaching and maybe why?
Anyone have any thoughts on that?
I was just thinking about it. If you think of the different styles of each each is different time,
you know, Guru Shakyamuni was working in a time where it didn't seem like the emphasis was like
the yogic tradition in that sense of going off into the gate and doing that solo where it seemed
like, you know, more communities and really focusing on that real cultivating that ethic at
that foundation. And so there it seems the Sutra really brings out those qualities, you know,
whereas once you get into the times of Guru Padmasambhava and you're also looking at the
flexibility of all the different ways that, you know, Guru Padmasambhava was working in all of
those times, it seems it ties that, you know, the Vajrayana, it seems to be more the
tool that fits the time. It seems what both the Sutras fit the time, fit the circumstance,
it fit what is needed at the time. And then when Guru Padmasambhava was teaching, you know,
the Vajrayana, that clear, you know, and also you're thinking of the different regions.
To me, that just seems like you have to tie into that, but I can't be certain.
Yeah, maybe like the time and the places too. Yeah, absolutely.
In India mainly, and then Guru Padmasambhava was in Tibet a lot of his life. And so maybe like the
teachings that they gave were really according both to the time and the cultures and the people
there and what they were, what was appropriate. It's difficult. It's hard to take the tack of like
really looking at the cultural context without really investigating it and knowing it. I don't
personally know it that well. I mean, Guru Mache was in India. He was born 500 BCE and then went
into Tibet mainly in the eighth century. So he's there for like 1300 years in India, doing a lot,
you know. And it was so different, the culture and the countries.
Maybe a good way is to look at what are the differences between, or let's highlight the
differences and similarities between the sutras and the tantras. Instead of looking at the cultural
context side, which is really factual, detail oriented, where we really have to get all the
facts straight. But the sutras and tantras, of course we have to get the facts straight,
but we can talk more generally in terms of the teachings, how the Buddha, like how Buddhism
is presented in terms of the sutras and tantras, which may be a little more fruitful.
So what are principal distinctions between some sutra and tantra?
Or like, so who taught what and what are some principal distinctions?
Well, I thought to just point out, like leaning into that, that all the
thousand, they say a thousand Buddhas are going to appear during this fortunate Iyam, this
Kapa that we live in right now. And that one of these Supreme and Ramada Kai emanation,
they're called manifest enlightenment, full enlightenment, as fully enlightened Buddhas.
They always take the form of fully ordained monk. So that's just a, and then generally,
like Buddha Shakyamuni, on the outer level, talked of just sutra-yana, you know, the causal yana of
cause and effect, including the four noble truths. And that basically, you practice this way,
a brute suffering, and engage in the causes to attain enlightenment. And based on that, you
experience the result. I mean, I just thought to just mention that particular form that the
Buddhas manifest in. That's correct, right? They always take the form of fully ordained monk when
they demonstrate enlightenment in this Kapa. I think of this Kapa. Definitely not of all the
Buddhas. So that's like when, I mean, just to be specific about that, of those thousand Buddhas,
they come when the full, the complete instructions for achieving enlightenment at that time don't
exist yet. Maybe part of them exist, or none of them exist. So they're those thousand Buddhas when
they come, when at that time there isn't complete instructions to achieve enlightenment. And that's
when those thousand Buddhas manifest as fully ordained monks. So that's why Guru Padmasambhava,
who was a fully enlightened being, also, but he was not an ordained monk. Because, you're saying,
because, at that time, at one point, Buddhist teachers were available. Because he's not one
of the one thousand, they call it, supreme namadakalayana emanations. A specific type of
emanation that manifests how to attain enlightenment. But when the teachings,
like Kapa said, when the teachings don't exist. But I mean, the reason why I mention that is mainly
because on the outer level, that accords with the duality mind of beings. It's very clear.
And it's very clear. The conduct would be very clear. It's like, people see that and they know,
they kind of know what it means. And they can use that as a basis. But Guru Padmasambhava's conduct
,
for example, was, the Buddhist conduct was beyond duality too. But Guru Padmasambhava engaged in
all
kind of liberating. He was born in a lotus. Yeah, he was born in a lotus, as an eight-year-old.
But I mean, just that distinction, you know, to show that, you know, you can't really misunderstand
Buddha Shakyamuni's, you know, when he's establishing the teachings, where he stands.
And I think, too, again, maybe this isn't as particular to sutriyana, tantriyana,
as to a distinction, but just that level of how
Buddha Shakyamuni's wisdom, mind and abilities and everything's so vast, as well as Guru Padmasambh
ava.
And so we're really talking mostly right now from the perspective of our human world.
Like, Guru Shakyamuni taught all of these teachings. And at that time, within humanity,
who was ready, you know, to receive, it was mostly the foundational teachings, you know,
sutriyana teaches everything that he more widely taught, like that most humans received. But he
taught on so many other levels and with other beings. And then, just in that aspect of Guru
Pashay's activities, then, too, how he's not introducing something new that Buddha Shakyamuni
never mentioned. It's just he, the times where conditions were kind of coming right. And already,
I mean, it wasn't just Guru Padmasambhava. There were so many great realized masters who had
realized, you know, mahayana, tantrayana, vajayana practices, it's like the civilizations at that
time were like these amazing Buddhist civilizations. And so there were so many great masters and
Guru Padmasambhava was this great, blazing, wisdom being who really, you know,
helped to really bring down into this world, maybe all this other aspect of all the
Buddha Shakyamuni's teachings, you know, to this, again, he taught too many too, but within our
human
experience, the Buddha's teachings and the
vajrayana too, which entails mahayana, yanayana, it's the whole package.
So maybe just to think of them, like you're saying, just to summarize what you're saying,
is that they, that both Buddha Shakyamuni and Guru Padmasambhava taught the entire path.
And it's just that, that maybe Guru Shakyamuni, because of the circumstances of the time,
was highlighting maybe more the sutrayana teachings in a really outward way.
And then Guru Padmasambhava, his time, his very long life, was highlighting more the tantrayana.
But which is based, as you said, on the sutrayana. One interesting thing too, I just thought of
this,
we also have to recognize that, you know, we're hearing this,
you know, through, I mean, particularly with with Buddha Shakyamuni, it was others who wrote
things down, you know, it was, it was the Arhats coming together to write those things. So,
you know, who's to say that, you know, I mean, maybe we heard the sentence, but you know how many
different levels of Buddha Shakyamuni's teaching on, but how many levels are people hearing on,
you know, how many levels are they conveying on. I think also on our end too, you know, as we're,
as we're, as we're going over the teachings and, you know, studying and contemplating,
meditating on those teachings, you know, it's also, you know, it's, it's not that the time,
you know, all the different levels of the teaching are, of course, in these things and,
you know, how much is the harvest activity too. Yeah, it's, yeah, it's good, we could say a lot.
There's just this distinction between sutra and tantra are really, so it's good, just like, I mean,
I think to reiterate what Lai was saying, within the tantras are the sutras. So the tantras include
the sutras. Bhafriyana includes Sutra Mahayana, includes Hinayana. That's very clear. So when
Guru Rinpoche came to Tibet, or when he was in India, and demonstrating all this, all the different
aspects of the teaching, and he was known as like the master of tantra, like he brought this tantra
teachings into Tibet, meaning all of the Buddha's teachings into Tibet. It's to say that he, I mean
,
it's really to emphasize the point that it includes everything that Buddhist Shakyamuni taught,
while Buddhist Shakyamuni in human form lived for 81 years, around 600, so BC, includes all those
teachings. And those teachings, like Andrew said, they're more outer level teachings. You, like,
for example, there is suffering, we see that in our experience. We don't have to have any
philosophy,
or have any unusual belief to know that suffering exists, because we directly experiencing
ourselves according to how our mind is right now. It suffers, there's pain, there's sickness, we
see
that. We, you don't have to convince someone. It's self-evident to all of us. And so the sutras
really
line up with the, like Andrew said, the duality mind, or the, just our usual habitual way of
understanding things. There are these, there's suffering, so it has a cause. So Buddha taught the
cause. Is there a way to end suffering? Buddha said, yes, there is a way. There's a path. You,
by accumulating these positive causes, you eventually can achieve the cessation of suffering.
And so that sutra, meaning, it posits that there truly is a real suffering. There is a real cause
there, right? There are these things we experience, there is sickness, there is me. And so the next
step in sutra is to say, well, where is the suffering? Where is its really cause? Where is
this real me that we experience? And so then you get the second turning teachings on the emptiness
of the flexibility of these things. That samsara isn't, samsara is more of a thought or a concept
in our minds. But then the tantrana goes beyond that and says it's not just that, you know, these
concepts are totally flexible. But what happens, how is our mind when it's not habitually grabbing
onto these concepts in such a narrow way? Then, then what becomes available? Then how flexible
are things? And so tantra is, that's almost like the starting point of tantra, when the nature is
totally unrestricted by its conceptual grasping. And then what is available? You have a being that
can arise and live for 1,500 years and, you know, manifest in eight different ways as a fully
ordained monk. There is a blue, you know, a blue being like surrounded with flames and just all
these things that totally shake our usual rigid way of just assuming things only are this one way.
So tantra includes the much greater flexibility of what the mind and heart can do when it's not
held,
holding onto itself so tightly. And then, so yeah, this, like, just to say a few principles.
Because
it's similar, and so I have to really emphasize the similarity between sutra and tantra and the
distinction between sutra and tantra. And so Rinpoche says so many times, tantra goes directly
to the nature. Whereas sutra stays, goes, starts at the grasping we have and then peels away that
grasping and slowly, gradually reveals the nature. The tantra goes directly to the nature and
releases
the grasping that's covering up that nature from being fully evident to everyone, to oneself and
others. So it directs a question also of directness and it's related to a non-yana system. So it's
more direct and more detailed and more of a complete expression of what the nature is when it's not
covered by any grasping.
So there's a lot to say, I mean, but maybe we'll keep going and get to this second point too.
Here I'll do a quick summary of the second half of the chapter. So Rinpoche continues saying there
are different accounts of how long Rinpoche stayed in Tibet, but most say he stayed for 100, about
lunar years, which means about 55 years in the western calendar. These different accounts of
his life demonstrate that Rinpoche was not restricted by our usual limited concepts,
since the nature of ourselves and everything is naturally limitless. Some accounts say that he
stayed in Tibet for about 55 years at the request of Dharma king Tritsendetsen to help the Dharma
continue after the king passed away. On the day of Rinpoche's departure from Tibet, he gave his
final teachings, then ascended into the sky on a horse, leaving to tame beings and bring them to
peace of Dharma in the land of the glorious copper-colored mountain. You say so, Jahl, and all the
great Chertans have met Rinpoche at least once at Copper-Color Mountain, to receive teachings from
Guru Rinpoche about revealing terma treasures and benefiting the Dharma and all beings.
In his terma teachings, Guru Rinpoche gave many detailed instructions about what would happen
in the future, sometimes centuries later, and how to help solve various problems and imbalances of
those different times. Guru Rinpoche also composed some written teachings in the Kama oral lineage,
which were not concealed as terma for future generations, including teachings such as the
garland of views, commentary on the Gurya Garvatantra, ornament of the cemetery cuckoo, and others.
Guru Rinpoche is a living Buddha who has been important to all the schools of Tibetan Buddhism,
most of which trace their transmission and blessing directly from him. He embodies all
the Buddhas, bodhisattvas, and enlightened masters of all 10 directions and three times,
and is the special Buddha of our era.
That's the chapter.
So the second topic for discussion is from page 90, second full paragraph, and page 91,
the last paragraph. On the day of his departure from Tibet, Padmasambhava students and current
and the current king and courtiers went with him to a mountain pass named Guntang Lhotap.
On the border of Tibet and Nepal, he stopped at the mountain pass and said that no one should
follow him further. All the people became very emotional, and as he began giving his final
teaching, he levitated and continued teaching from the sky. A horse appeared in the air,
and he mounted the horse and rode off in the western direction. Guru Padmasambhava did not die
in the way that we normally think of death. Rather, he was able to transmute all the gross elements
of
his body into wisdom light. This is called attaining the rainbow body, and it is a state
of wisdom beyond birth and death. Guru Padmasambhava holds a special place among the Tibetan
Buddhist
schools, most of which trace transmission and blessings directly from him. He is an embodiment
of all enlightened beings. Of course, all the buddhas work for the benefit of sentient beings,
but because Guru Padmasambhava made the Vajrayana teachings available to us,
he is considered to be the special Buddha of our era.
It's funny, Guru Rinpoche, all these qualities, even with our beautiful teachers,
just kind of leaves you speechless. This chapter is very biographical,
but it's interesting in that way of how, like we mentioned earlier, Guru Padmasambhava was really
establishing these levels of the really direct levels of the Buddhist teachings,
really displaying the flexibility of the nature and how this boundless, inconceivable
activities of bodhicitta and everything. In every single way, not just that he sat and taught,
but like every example of his life, that's the thing that kind of calls out the way,
you know, from, we just look at that, like we mentioned earlier, born on a lotus, and
he never died in the way that we consider. I mean, he just, you know, there's even just those
two major marker points is such a deep, profound display of the nature, which is what the teachings
are. I mean, that's kind of what really kind of strikes home in a way, just how the activities,
there's the teachings, but then there's the teaching of just all these displays of what's possible.
And then, like, Lojo, I think what you were getting at earlier, like, as far as,
it sounded like you were talking a little bit about devotion and something on that level of just
how that, it's like something just really inspires and increases, shows what's possible,
kind of, you know, overwhelms us a little bit, even if we don't, you know, however we want to think
about it, it's still, I mean, that's, I don't really have a question about anything in regard to
that,
but it's just kind of the main point kind of that's coming across.
I think it's beautiful to, yeah, it's beautiful, I mean, just exactly what you're saying,
it's really so beautiful that if we, as Buddhist practitioners or anyone on a spiritual path,
the whole idea of continuing on a spiritual path is we have to see where we're getting stuck,
like, we have to see where we're holding onto things that, because we fear something and we're
hoping for something, if we don't see those places that we're holding and grasping and more
restricted,
more constricted, more contracted, if we don't see them and bring more air into them, loosen them
up,
stop doing them, stop giving them fuel, the further causes to continue, we won't continue,
like, that's the end of our path, whether it's pride that makes us stop growing or it's doubt
that makes us stop growing or it's being, you know, really aggressive and, like, repulsed against
anything that would open us up to cause us to blossom more, like, there's activities of Guru
Rinpoche and of Buddha Shakyamuni too, I mean, Buddha Shakyamuni is just so, just like the golden
standard to how to be a perfect, perfectly balanced, totally harmonious being that, like, just was
in
sync with everything on every level, it's like, what a standard to, like, totally release all the
ways that we're restricted and then Guru Rinpoche just, like, I mean, just what we see of him is
this,
like, utter demonstration of how flexible and how wondrous and how amazing and how beneficial we
can
be once we release these things, it's like they're giving us all, anything we need to say, as, like
,
standards or models, examples for why we should keep growing and how we can keep growing, like,
why we need to lessen these restrictions because there's so much more love we have, we don't need
to fear being loved if we let go or fear being alone or whatever, but it's just beautiful in
both ways, they're just these models for, like, how a path continues and, like, what we need to do
to
loosen up and become more functional and less restricted, it's beautiful in that, in that sense,
like, seeing these stories of Guru Rinpoche and some, I know there's a usual response of it being,
like, it's all myth or it's all fantasy or it's fantastical, how could someone be 15 years old?
And I think it's exactly that point, a thousand years old or however long these,
some of these great masters lived for centuries and it's because if we think of things as concrete
things with concrete beginnings and concrete duration and concrete end, it doesn't make sense,
it's impossible because causes and conditions. If something has a definitive cause, it has to have
a definitive end, that's the Buddha's teaching, but if it doesn't have a definitive cause or birth,
it doesn't ever have to end and Guru Rinpoche, or this is, like, totally, like, shattered the sense
of holding on to anything, like, any, it doesn't have a beginning, you know, as an eight-year-old
boy,
doesn't have an end, a horse appears and he magically, like, goes off and then reappears
on the 10th day every, you know, I mean, it's just so incredible. I was curious, particularly,
speaking personally about this, you know, I remember there was definitely a time where
a lot of the qualities, you know, of Guru Patmasambhava became kind of a hindrance to
practice in that sense of, you know, it's doubt, because I think, particularly from the perspective
of,
of, you know, it's reminded to us, again, again, you know, investigate, look, you know, be really
scientific with it, and there's, there's no real way to investigate, you know, the, you know, the
history of Patmasambhava, the qualities of Patmasambhava, there's, you know, so then, you know, but
then
at the same time, when you really start sinking into the view, then, you know, it gets more to
what you were saying, it becomes inspiring, it creates that flexibility, it becomes, it really,
you know, it really ignites the teaching, and it really, you know, so how do you, how do you work
with the doubt aspect to keep, sorry, I mean, one, one, I mean, just to remember, too, one of the
activities of Guru Patmasambhava was he was a devoted student. He just, he studied with so many
great masters. He studied, he practiced. He didn't just display all these things, all these
miraculous
activities, like that's all he did. He had the entirety of the Buddhist teachings in his mind.
He taught them. He studied with great masters and teachers for decades and decades and practiced.
And I think that too, even if, even if that's too remote, we can look at people in our own lif
etimes,
our precious teachers who we've met, look at their qualities, what they've gone through in their
life,
how we, what, how the, just some of the ways, you know, I know I have such limited vision, but
can definitely see such benefit, you know, and just in a way, like that, like I think with the
Buddhist teachings, or like anything, you need to have some degree of interest, some degree of,
you know, confidence in your own ability, and then explore, you know, with an open mind and an open
heart, you know, like once you feel that, you want to follow. So I mean, I think that's how we
conquered
out, is we actually, like the Buddha said, you know, don't take my word for it, like take this,
like,
you know, merchant would examine the gold they're receiving, or really just study and practice.
Just the, in terms of devotion coming, because of, even if maybe you don't necessarily have a
strong connection, at least in the beginning to Guru Parampasan Baba or Guru Shakyamuni,
or you know, you're just starting out, usually, you know, most people have some connection to
the teachings or a teacher or something. And as we study the teachings more, whatever level of
teachings, you know, we automatically it's like, where does these teachings come from? And then
when we recall, oh, these teach these things, I'm reading this teachings, I'm receiving from my
teachers, and, you know, this comes from the Buddha. And then it's can kind of be like, oh,
and this comes from Guru Parampasan Baba, like, like this last line in the says about how,
like the specialness of, of Guru Shakyamuni and Guru Parampasan Baba in particular, among all the
Buddhas, is that they came at this time, where we are now, and gave this teaching, and it's still
available, available to us. And like, so that in itself is so miraculous, you know, so even before
you even know much about Guru Parampasan Baba or the Buddha, but you, every single teaching you
read,
every single teaching you receive is, is like, from their kindness and compassion for us.
So that's really special. That's true. As a quick note, maybe elaborate on that. Can anyone speak
to
maybe how the investigative mind can be on one end, prideful investigation, like in that sense
of getting stuck in certain ways of doing investigation, other ways they open investigation,
or maybe from your own practice, or from your own way relating to the teachings? Yeah, I've found
something helpful in that, because I'm a very scientifically and doubt-minded person by nature.
But it's like, what I've seen, just like what, what all of you are saying, it's like, these, well,
one, you just come in contact with the teaching. Obviously, you might be interested in Buddhism,
if you're even listening to this, or engaged in the teaching. And when you hear the teaching,
there's just that basic sense of, this is like an otherworldly, profound, deep thing that I don't
see right now. But there's that sense of, you know, of how vast and magical it is, and all the
potential
within it. You know, all you have to do is read a sutra, and you're like, oh my god, you know,
forget about reading the Tantra teachings, you know, it's like totally beyond where you are right
now,
for most people. So the point is, if we like Guru Padmasubhana, he was an elimination of Amitabha,
he was an elimination of Amitayas, he was an, he was a display of the nature. That's what the
teaching says. He was the natural display. So for that, it's, yeah, it is, yeah, he's a, he's a, he
's
a living Buddha. And in the nature is, you know, totally vast and open. That's what all the
teachings
say. That's what I, Buddha and Guru Padmasubhana could do, all those things that we normally
consider to be impossible. Like one time, Rivetche said, oh, you know, just because they fly in the
sky, or do this, and transmute the elements, or live for a long time. Well, that seems like magic.
You know, they're like, that seems unnatural, that seems impossible. They're like, actually,
that's the most natural thing ever, because the nature is totally open in freedom status.
You know, the nature of mind, the nature of reality is completely open. And if you're engaging in
investigation, from the standpoint of what I see right now, is the only thing that could exist.
It's just like, good luck. Two-year-old will only see the two-year-old world. A ten-year-old will
only see the ten-year-old world. You know, it's just like, that's, if you come from that
perspective,
then where you are right now, you take to be the absolute final definitive view. But then you must
be enlightened. You must be totally enlightened. If you have that view, my view is the only one
that
can be possible. Okay, you're fully enlightened being then, because your view must include the
whole vastness of everything. So, we have to leave room, I mean, we don't have to, but if we want
to
keep going, have to leave room for possibility that we don't see the full picture right now.
And if we don't see the full picture, by practicing the teachings, all you have to do is look at
the
examples like Raya says, or like Drapa says. The fact is, millions of beings have attained
enlightenment by practicing these teachings, really countless infinite beings. So, if we take that
and
if we, if we even connect with one being who is at that state, you know, at that high level, like
they said, we follow their example, and the proof is in the pudding. You practice the teachings of
Guru Palma Subhana, you will attain enlightenment. And that demonstrates that Guru Palma Subhana is
coming from within that natural state, and that anything's possible in that state.
And it seems too, kind of, what Lodo was asking, and also what maybe it would look like, distilling
some of what Angie was saying. That part of, if we, the difference between doubt, that, I guess it
sounds
like, there's a difference between investigating something with a really set, set of an agenda or
something. Yeah, you know. And then there's investigating something with, to the best of
our ability, with using our intelligence and our logic and an honest, hard, you know, an open,
kind of, investigation in that sense. Using